Add On time blog (#181)
openfaas/openfaas.github.io: _posts/2020-04-18-schedule-your-functions.md

---
title: "On time - schedule your OpenFaaS functions"
description: "In this post Martin will show you how to deploy a component which will execute your functions on a schedule"
date: 2020-04-18
image: /images/2020-04-18-schedule-your-functions/accuracy-alarm-clock-analogue.jpg
categories:
  - cronjobs
  - kubernetes
  - serverless
  - linux
  - tutorial
  - example
author_staff_member: martin
dark_background: true

---

In this blog post I will show you how you can run your functions on schedule. We will first set our environment and then we will run the cron-connector with example function which will be executed on a schedule.

One of the things we need very often is our functions to be executed on a schedule. This is where the cron-connector shines. We will showcase how you can use it in this post.

## Motivation

> OpenFaaS provides very convenient and flexible way to quickly write and expose your code to be used by external systems. Often times those systems don't have a hook to which you can schedule function execution. Also often times we need to run those functions without external systems, we just want our code to be ran on an interval.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenFaaS provides a very convenient and flexible way to quickly write and expose your code to be used by external systems. Often times those systems don't have a hook to which you can schedule function execution. Also often times we need to run those functions without external systems, we just want our code to be ran on an interval.
```

Author: Done :heavy_check_mark:

For those purposes [connector-sdk](https://github.com/openfaas-incubator/connector-sdk) was created. It provides the means to quickly adapt different systems to invoke functions. Some of them are [Kafka](https://github.com/openfaas-incubator/kafka-connector), [NATS](https://github.com/openfaas-incubator/nats-connector), [AWS SNS](https://github.com/affix/OpenFaaS-SNS) and [many more](https://docs.openfaas.com/reference/triggers/).

> Now we need our functions to to be invoked on an interval. The [cron-connector](https://github.com/openfaas-incubator/cron-connector) exists for those purposes much like Kubernetes provides specific object called `CronJob` which executes code on a schedule or how in Linux we have cron configuration which run scripts on a schedule.

Reviewer: It would be good to connect this to the previous paragraph by saying that the cron-connector is another example of the connector-sdk.  the name implies it but, it might be good to make that explicit.  I might write it something like this 

```suggestion
Now we need our functions to to be invoked on an interval. In Linux we have the [cron configuration](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron) that allows us to execute gode on a schedule.  In Kubernetes, this was abstracted into the `CronJob` object.  For any OpenFaaS cluster, the [cron-connector](https://github.com/openfaas-incubator/cron-connector) uses the `connector-sdk` to provide the same functionality, running our functions on a predefined schedule.
```

Author: Yep, very good suggestion will change as proposed :+1:

Author: Done :heavy_check_mark:

Now lets roll up our sleeves and see how we can execute our OpenFaaS functions on time.

## Prerequisites

> Before we start we need a couple of binaries to set up our environment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we start we need a couple of tools to help us quickly set up our environment:
```

Author: I was too explicit here :smile: will change

Author: Done :heavy_check_mark:

* [docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) - the container runtime used in this post
* [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/) - lightweight local Kubernetes cluster which uses containers as nodes
* [arkade](https://github.com/alexellis/arkade) - one line installation of applications with which we will install OpenFaaS
* [faas-cli](https://docs.openfaas.com/cli/install/) - the CLI which communicates with the OpenFaaS gateway
* [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/) - the CLI which communicates with your Kubernetes cluster

## Prepare environment

Before showing you how to run our functions on a schedule, first we need to set up the environment with the tools mentioned above.

### Create cluster

First thing we need is running Kubernetes cluster:

```bash
kind create cluster
```

> Wait for the installation to finish and verify the namespaces are `Active`:

Reviewer: This part is a little ambiguous to me, what do you mean by Active? what should a user expect? Is it just a zero exit code?  It might be good to tell them what they should expect, in this case I think it is this list
```
NAME                 STATUS   AGE
default              Active   36h
kube-node-lease      Active   36h
kube-public          Active   36h
kube-system          Active   36h
local-path-storage   Active   36h
```

Unless there is an alternative command where the output is a more definitive "Everything is correct"?

Author: Yep that is what I meant, though I think checking whether your kubernetes cluster is up and running might be related with the pods in the kube-system more rather than namespaces. I will change that with 1/1 pods in the `kube-system` namespace :+1:

Author: Changed to `kubectl get pods kube-system` for the control plane :heavy_check_mark:

```bash
kubectl get ns
```

### Install OpenFaaS

With `arkade` the installation of OpenFaaS boils down to single line command:

```bash
arkade install openfaas
```

> Wait for `Active` status on all pods:

Reviewer: I think the status in the out is `Running` not active.  

I would use `kubectl rollout status -n openfaas deploy/gateway` because it will just block until the gateway is ready, which is exactly what you want and doesn't require as much guessing about the output of the `kubectl get pods`

Author: I think your suggestion would be better :+1:

Author: Done :heavy_check_mark:

```bash
kubectl get pods -n openfaas --watch
```

### Set up OpenFaaS client

Get the OpenFaaS Gateway password:

```bash
PASSWORD=$(kubectl get secret -n openfaas basic-auth -o jsonpath="{.data.basic-auth-password}" | base64 --decode; echo)
```

> Locate the external IP of the kubernetes node:

Reviewer: Perhaps this would be cleaner as "Configure the gateway url". and you can just set the `OPENFAAS_URL` env variable, which the CLI will also check and use when it is set

Author: Will do :+1:

Author: Done :heavy_check_mark:

```bash

> EXTERNAL_IP=$(docker inspect -f "{{ .NetworkSettings.IPAddress }}" $(docker ps -aqf "name=kind-control-plane"))

Reviewer: Interesting, i haven't used this before.  It might be simpler than the `port-forward` approach we use here https://github.com/openfaas/certifier#development, very nice

Author: :+1: I found it annoying to port-forward for a blog post

```

Authenticate the client:

```bash
echo -n $PASSWORD | faas-cli login --username admin --password-stdin --gateway=http://$EXTERNAL_IP:31112
```

## Schedule the functions

After we have the environment up and running, now we can install the cron-connector and schedule our functions to run at specific intervals.

### Deploy the cron-connector

In order to install our `cron-connector` and schedule a function run the following command:

```bash
curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/openfaas-incubator/cron-connector/master/yaml/kubernetes/connector-dep.yml | kubectl apply -f -
```

Wait for the connector's status to turn `Running`:

```bash

> kubectl get pods -n openfaas --watch

Reviewer: Again, i would use status here

```suggestion
kubectl rollout status -n openfaas deploy/sample-connector
```

Author: Also will change this :+1:

Author: Done :heavy_check_mark:

```

## Run the function

We will run a function from the store once a minute with a `schedule` annotation following this cron syntax `*/1 * * * *` which is the same as in the [linux cron configuration](https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/how-do-i-add-jobs-to-cron-under-linux-or-unix-oses/).

The cron-connector recognizes which functions should be ran on a schedule by annotation `topic` with value `cron-function`.

Finally we will deploy `node-info` function and apply the schedule and topic annotations mentioned above:

```bash

> faas-cli store deploy nodeinfo --annotation schedule="*/1 * * * *" --annotation topic=cron-function --gateway=http://$EXTERNAL_IP:31112

Author: alternative to this function is creating a function which will ping a server once per minute(`google.com`) and in wrapping up we can say the function can ping someone's personal server and if the server is down the user can be notified in slack or something else.

^ depending on how long we want this post to be

Reviewer 2: Yes that's a good and practical use-case, running node info on a timer basis seems a bit too contrived.

```

> If you wait for a few minutes and visit the OpenFaaS UI you will see how the `Invocation count` of the function raises every minute.

Reviewer: This might also be a good us for the `faas-cli logs`.

What if the function used the github search API to count the number of projects with the tag `openfaas` and then print the stats to stdout.  This could be fun and be more interesting in the logs

Author: Yeah I agree it would be more interesting, I left a comment on the function used in the blog. My only concern is the focus of the blog, like would we steal the attention from the `cron-connector` if we write a custom function? I already spend half the post showing how you can deploy OpenFaaS

Reviewer: I don't think you need go into details about the function, just say you have "written a function to demonstrate the behavior, it is available [here]" and just create a tiny repo that has that function in it (maybe commit the template folder to ensure it builds in the future)

Author: Yeah I like this idea, will do :+1:
